Well, good afternoon, everybody.
Bonjour, konichiwa, nimakauma.
Welcome, bienvenue, daigafu, nyingra.
This is session 374,
internationalizing your software.
And I am John Jenkins.
I'm a senior software engineer at Apple.
I will be your guide to this
wonderful world of localization
and internationalization.
In the spirit of the session,
I am also Zheng Zhaohang,
or in the barbarian northern dialect,
Zheng Zhaohang, or if you prefer,
Shona Prichardt.
or even Juani Tinikini.
I will answer to any of those
and I may give a prize to the
first person who can identify all
four localizations of my name.
So, what are we talking about?
Internationalization,
which is often referred to
with the abbreviation I18N,
an I followed by 18
letters followed by an N.
This is the process of preparing
your software to be used in different
places and with different languages.
Localization,
which has a similar abbreviation, L10N.
This is the process of actually adding
data for specific languages and locales.
You need to do both of them if you're
going to be properly internationalized.
Both processes must be done.
However, of the two,
the most important is
the internationalization,
the process of getting things ready,
getting things set up.
This has to be done by the programmers.
This has to be done in-house.
This has to be done first.
Once it is done, the localization,
particularly on Mac OS,
the localization is an almost
entirely separate process.
It comes later.
It can be done,
actually can be outsourced and
off to third parties to do.
The structure that we have and which
we'll be explaining makes it easy to add
localizations once the work is finished.
So we will be focusing
on internationalization.
We will also be focusing on Mac OS X.
Pretty much everything here does,
in fact, apply to the iPhone as well.
So if you learn how to
internationalize on the Mac,
you know how to
internationalize on the iPhone.
So learn it once,
and you can do it on both ways.
Some key ideas that we want everyone to
come away from this session understanding
is that internationalization
is enormously difficult.
It is a very, very hard thing to do.
Fortunately, we have done it for you.
If you use the APIs built into Mac OS,
virtually all of the work
will be done for you.
In fact, for most people,
all of the work will be done for you.
There will be a few people,
a few situations where you
need something special that
you'll have to do on your own,
but almost nobody will
have to deal with them.
So write your application properly,
use the APIs that we provide,
and everything comes automatically.
Which means we're through, basically.
There are three main steps
to internationalization.
The first is to use Unicode.
The second is to take
advantage of bundles.
And then the third is to use locales.
We will be discussing all three of these.
And they all need to be done.
Now, as I say,
we do most of the work for you,
so you may not actually
have to use these directly,
but you should at least understand
what's going on under the hood.
So, let's start with Unicode.
Now, Unicode, you know,
I'm old enough that I remember
introducing Unicode as
a new character set.
Unicode is, in fact,
not a new character set.
It's almost 20 years old.
And yet, there's a surprising amount
of misunderstandings that
you'll run into regarding it.
So, we're going to take a few minutes
and discuss it in some detail.
Unicode, if you do not know,
is a character set,
and its goal is to make it
possible to represent on computers
simultaneously all written languages,
living or dead.
It's not quite there yet.
There are some dead
languages it doesn't cover.
There are some minority
scripts it doesn't cover.
But virtually anything that your
users will run into is in Unicode now,
or will be shortly.
And by simultaneous, I mean exactly that.
A properly written Unicode
application can handle any text in
any writing system with equal ease.
You could even theoretically
have a document which contains in
one document samples from every
language and every writing system,
and it will work.
That's what Unicode is all about.
The current version of
the standard is 5.1.0.
That came out just a couple months ago.
And there are currently over
100,000 characters in Unicode.
Now, the exact number depends
on how you count them.
There are a number of control characters,
things like that.
But there are over 100,000
graphical characters that cover
77 different writing systems.
So, as I say, pretty much everything you
will need is already there.
Moreover, Unicode is the way to represent
internationalized text in
almost every setting now,
but in particular on the Internet.
Just to give an example,
if you do HTML and you use
numeric entities at all,
those are Unicode code points.
So it is everywhere
that you're doing text.
And just so that you're
familiar with the convention,
the way to represent Unicode
code points is with a capital U,
a plus sign,
and then four to six hexadecimal
digits following that.
And this is the convention
we'll be following here.
Main thing to remember and to
understand about Unicode is
that it is not 16-bit ASCII.
ASCII is obscenely easy to program for.
There's almost nothing you need to do.
Unicode is almost obscenely
difficult to program for.
It is very hard to do.
And as I say,
we've done the work for you,
and you should be glad of that.
There are some things that you may run
into or that you may need to be aware of.
And we'll mention those briefly.
We're not going to go
into all of Unicode.
We could devote an entire conference.
In fact, there are entire conferences
devoted to Unicode.
But we'll be mentioning here
some really important points.
The first is the existence of the
different encoding forms of Unicode.
Second is the byte order mark.
The four or five normalization forms and,
most importantly, grapheme clusters.
And again,
don't try to do this on your own.
You may need to know what's going on.
But if so long as you're doing it,
you're going to be able to do it.
And if so long as you use
the APIs that we've provided,
you should be just fine.
So encoding forms.
There are three basic ways
that Unicode is actually
represented in terms of bytes.
The first of these is UTF-8.
This is a byte-oriented protocol.
You read data one byte at a time.
This means a couple of
really useful things.
In particular,
it is upwardly compatible with ASCII.
A valid ASCII file is a valid UTF-8 file.
It also means that you can use
it in a lot of different ways.
You can use it in a
lot of different ways.
The second is that UTF-8 works seamlessly
with older protocols and older libraries
which expect ASCII-like character sets.
UTF-8 is now the most common text
encoding used on the Internet.
Google announced just a few weeks ago
that of all the pages on the Internet,
more are encoded in UTF-8
than any other text encoding.
Now, there's also UTF-16.
UTF-16 is the oldest way of
representing Unicode on computers,
and it's the way that you will
typically see in libraries.
In particular, it's the form which we
use inside NSString.
UTF-16, as the name implies,
you're reading data 16 bits at a time,
two bytes.
And if you're dealing with
units of more than one byte,
you have to care about byte swapping.
Now, there's a built-in mechanism
that I'll mention in a minute
to deal with byte swapping.
There are also two variations of UTF-16,
UTF-16BE and UTF-16LE,
which specify in advance
what the byte order is,
so that you can deal with that.
And finally, there's UTF-32, and as,
again, the name implies,
you're dealing with
data 32 bits at a time,
four bytes,
so there are also two variations that
specify the byte order in advance.
UTF-32 is not terribly common,
and it is not likely
to be terribly common,
and this is why.
Here we have four
characters from Unicode.
A common Latin letter,
a not-quite-so-common Latin letter,
a relatively common Chinese character,
and a decidedly rare Chinese character.
And how you represent them in each
of these three encoding forms.
UTF-8, capital letter A is one byte, 4-1,
just as you would expect.
The others require two, three,
and four bytes, respectively.
UTF-16 are common characters,
each require two bytes.
The rare character requires four.
UTF-32, they each require four bytes,
and that tells you instantly
what's wrong with UTF-32.
Most of those bits are zero.
Most of the bytes are zero.
So it's not a terribly efficient way
of storing text in terms of memory.
Hence, UTF-16 is probably going to be the
most common for the indefinite future.
Now,
I mentioned that Unicode has a built-in
mechanism to deal with byte order.
This is called the byte order mark,
Unicode F-E-F-F.
It is used to distinguish UTF-16
and UTF-32 byte order variations.
You don't need it if you already know
what the byte order is going to be,
if that's specified some other way.
In particular,
you don't need it for UTF-8.
UTF-8 reads data byte by byte.
There's no byte order.
However, you will sometimes see it at the
beginning of UTF-8 text files.
People use this as a flag so that
they know that the text file is UTF-8.
This can create problems,
but you do see it.
It's generated by several
different programs.
This is how it works.
You put the buy order mark at
the beginning of your text,
F-E-F-F.
You account on the fact that
its byte-swapped counterpart,
FFFE, is defined to be undefined.
So when the data is read in,
you read in the first two bytes,
you will either see F-E-F-F or F-F-F-E.
If you see F-E-F-F,
that's the byte order mark.
That tells you that you are interpreting
byte order the same way the text file is,
and you don't need to do anything.
If you see F-F-F-E,
you know that you do need to byte swap.
You are interpreting byte order,
or you have a different byte
order from the text file,
and you know how to proceed.
So here we have an example.
The first word in our document is 6F22.
There are two different
Unicode characters that this
could possibly represent,
although admittedly,
one of them is not likely to be
the first character in a text file,
but they're still both valid Unicode.
Without the byte order mark,
you don't know which one to use.
With the byte order mark, you do.
So you will see this at the beginning
of a lot of Unicode text files.
Next are the normalization forms.
One of the things that makes Unicode
really difficult to deal with is the fact
that characters or units on the screen,
what we call graphemes,
can be represented with more than
one byte and sometimes characters can
be represented in more than one way.
Example here is an accented E.
You can either do it as a single
character or as a pair of characters,
the lowercase e and the acute accent.
To simplify Unicode processing,
the Unicode Consortium has defined
four different normalization forms.
The idea is that you will take text,
you will normalize it to
one of these four forms,
you will then know an awful lot
about the characteristics it has,
and that will make it
easier for you to process.
The first form is normalization form C.
You use combined forms wherever possible.
Normalization form D is the opposite.
You use decomposed
forms wherever possible.
And then there are two
variations of these,
NFKC and NFKD.
The K stands for compatibility.
And the idea here is that Unicode has
what are called compatibility characters.
These two normalization forms will
get rid of the compatibility variance.
Before I show examples,
I just need to mention there is, in fact,
a fifth form that you may
theoretically run into on the Mac OS,
and that is the form used by HFS+.
HFS+ is a file system which is
used by most Macintoshes out there.
And it uses a form of names.
It uses UTF-16.
It uses a decomposed form of Unicode,
which is almost exactly the same as NFD,
but not quite.
There are some differences.
Again, this is not something you'll
probably have to deal with,
but you should be aware that it exists.
So here are some examples.
I want to compare NFC and NFD.
I've already showed one instance of this.
E with an acute accent.
Okay, you can either do it as a
single character or as two.
The common Korean surname Kim,
as in Kim Jong Il,
you can either do as a single
character or you can do it,
given the nature of Korean, as three,
the "keu," the "i,"
and the "m" separately.
To compare NFC and NFKC,
one of Unicode's goals was to be
compatible with character sets
which existed when it was created.
This makes it really useful for
upgrading old data or for doing
conversions between character sets.
But it also means that Unicode
inherited characters that it
otherwise would not have included.
And one of these is the FI ligature,
which is found at Unicode FB01.
has an FI ligature,
so Unicode had to have one.
Now, Unicode prefers that you do
ligatures by other mechanisms,
and so that's considered
a compatibility character.
It's there only for compatibility
with a different character set.
So if you use NFC, it will be there.
If you use NFKC,
the compatibility mapping is taken away,
and it's split into two characters,
the two pieces.
An even better example of a compatibility
character is F900 compared with 8C4.
Now, if you look at these,
your first impression may be
that they look exactly the same.
But if you look at them really, really,
really closely,
you'll notice that they do, in fact,
look exactly the same.
The difference between the two
is that they are pronounced
differently in Korean.
Unicode does not distinguish
characters based on how they
are pronounced in Korean,
but an older Korean character set did.
So Unicode has F900 as a
compatibility character.
And if you do one of the
compatibility mappings,
that distinction,
which is not relevant to Unicode,
will be removed.
And finally, we have an example,
and you can just look at it,
of the difference between NFD and
HFS+. This particular character is one
character in HFS+ on your file systems,
and it's two in NFD.
And again,
this is not a character you are, in fact,
likely to have in very many file names.
Finally, most importantly,
we want to talk about grapheme clusters.
I already mentioned Unicode can have
characters represented with pieces.
Now, what you see on the screen,
what you see on the printed page,
this is called a grapheme.
This is the basic unit of writing.
And it can be built up out of pieces.
And this is very useful in Unicode.
Okay, here we have a rather rare example.
This is a Greek alpha with a
macron and an acute accent.
You may actually see this in
books on ancient Greek poetry.
It's a legitimate thing
to want to represent.
However,
the number of possible combinations
of accents that do exist for Latin,
Greek, and Cyrillic is so astronomically
high that to find and encode
them all separately would
require prohibitive expense.
So Unicode takes the easy route,
and it just lets you encode it by hand.
Now, in practice,
what this means is that you cannot
just jump into an arbitrary point
in text and assume that you are
on the boundaries between things
that the user wants to distinguish.
You might be in the middle
of a grapheme cluster.
So if you are doing searching,
if you are doing substringing,
this you need to be very much aware of.
Because otherwise,
you might be doing things to the
text that don't reflect what the
user is actually looking for.
So that's Unicode.
Brief introduction.
How do you do Unicode?
How do you do text on Mac OS?
On the Mac and on the iPhone,
you use NSString.
This is the class for representing text.
It is toll-free bridged with
its core foundation counterpart,
CFStringRef.
That means that you can
use them interchangeably.
If you have a CFStringRef and you
need a pointer to an NSString,
you can just do a cast,
and that's all the
conversion that's needed.
NSString keeps you,
the application programmer,
from having to deal with the
complexities of text on your own.
Now, in this case,
there are some related classes
that you may find useful.
There's NSMutableString,
in case you are modifying
your string after you make it.
Perhaps you're creating
it one piece at a time.
There's NSAttributedString.
This is enormously useful.
If you want to have a button or a table
or some other UI element have text
that you get to control the font for,
that you get to specify
the point size for,
on the fly, you use NSAttributedString,
and it's drawn correctly.
Finally,
there's NSMutableAttributedString, which,
as the name implies, does both of these.
We'll be looking primarily at NSString.
How do you create them?
There's an easy way, which, of course,
you're not supposed to do.
Put them in your source code.
And the way you do that is you have your
string constant and you put an at sign in
front of it that tells the compiler that
this is an NSString and not a char star.
Or the most flexible way is
using string with format.
We'll discuss that in
a little more detail.
Now, if you have an array
of 16-bit characters,
unit chars,
and you know how long the array is,
you can just hand that into
NSString and create a string with that,
string with characters.
Notice, do not use WCharty.
WCharty on the Mac is
not 16 bits in size.
It is on other platforms.
It is not on the Mac.
You need to use something
which is 16 bits in size,
like a unit char or a
UN16T or something like that.
Not WCharty.
Finally, if you know the encoding
of an old piece of text,
it is a C string that
you got handed somehow,
it is an old file that you have,
it is something that is
being pulled off the web,
or it is even in an NSData object,
you know what the encoding is,
there are functions in
NSString that let you create a
string and convert it to Unicode.
So conversion to Unicode is simple.
We won't show examples,
but conversion from
Unicode is equally simple.
Now let's look at string with
format in a little more detail.
This is, as I say,
the way you will probably be doing
most of your string creation.
It's very simple,
because the syntax is almost
exactly the same as sprintf.
There are a couple of
differences that are very handy.
The first is to use %@,
this lets you include
an Objective-C object in
your formatted string.
Usually you use this
for an NSString object.
You can do it with other
Objective-C objects,
but typically you will
want to use NSString.
We'll show why later on.
You can even specify the order of the
parameters in the formatted object.
You use a % then a number indicating
the order of the parameter,
the index of the parameter,
then the $ and @.
These are one-based indices,
so you start with one,
and this lets you specify the
order in a particular format.
This is useful.
Different languages order
the same elements of a
sentence in a different way.
If you know a Romance language,
something like Spanish or French,
they will usually put adjectives,
for example, after the nouns they modify.
English prefers to put them first.
So you need to be able to control the
order of words in a sentence so that
you can do localization properly.
Now, let's do a couple of
examples here quickly.
Let's start out with a very easy one.
We have an NSString that
we want to create,
and we hand in a template
to string with format.
It takes one Objective-C object,
follows it with world.
We hand in an NSString greetings
as a parameter,
and we get greetings world.
Now we try it again with two parameters.
This time we want to control the order.
So we have in our first instance,
the first parameter comes
first in the sentence.
The second parameter comes second.
We hand in hello and
world as our parameters.
And we get out hello world.
Do the same thing with the order switch.
In the last example,
we have the second parameter coming first
and the first parameter coming second.
Again, we hand in "hello" and "world,"
and instead of getting "hello
world," we get "world hello."
Now, you may have noticed something
about this third example.
I cheated with regards
to the capitalization.
I knew in advance which one
was going to come first,
and so I capitalized appropriately.
That's not going to
happen most of the time.
To deal with that, in similar situations,
there is a rich array of functions
that are available for NSString that
you can use to manipulate a
string once you've created it.
There is, for example,
there are a number of casing messages
you can send an NSString object,
uppercase string, lowercase string,
capitalized string.
Typically,
you would use capitalized string
in a case like the one we just saw.
There is precomposed string
with compatibility mapping.
This is one of a number of functions
that lets you convert to a particular
Unicode normalization form,
in this case, NFKC.
Is equal to string.
You can compare strings.
This is the simplest way to do it.
There are variations on this
that give you more control.
You can also find out the
relative order of two strings.
If you need a substring,
substring with range, hand in a range.
Now, if you're dealing with substrings,
remember, you have to be worried about
graphing cluster boundaries.
And so to do that,
we have some functions.
We have range of composed characters,
sequence at index, hand in the index.
You get back the range of the
graphing cluster that contains it.
And similarly, with a range,
you can extend its boundaries so that
they match graphing cluster boundaries.
So these are the functions you use
to deal with graphing clusters.
Now, all of this is no good if you
can't localize what you're
going to display to the user.
The way we do this on Mac OS is we
have what are called .strings files.
And you can use a number of
different encodings for these.
We strongly recommend UTF-16.
In fact,
forget that you can do other encodings.
Just use UTF-16.
You can have problems otherwise.
And these are simply plain text files.
Each line, you have a key and a value.
And you use different functions
then to access the data in them.
The two most common will
be NSLocalizedString or the
second most common will be
NSLocalizedStringWithTable.
or maybe it's the other way around.
I'm not sure.
I haven't checked.
But probably use one or the other.
In both cases, you hand in a key,
the key that you want the
value corresponding to.
And when it's called,
the system will look through
the localizations available,
find the best match, and return the value
that corresponds to that.
Now, both of these also take a
localization hint as a parameter.
This is useful because of a
handy little tool we include on
the system called GenStrings.
GenStrings is a tool that you
run over your source files.
It looks inside them for calls to
NSLocalizedString and NSLocalizedString
with table and their variants,
and it creates the
.strings files for you.
Now, typically,
you don't need to hand in any command
line arguments because it will usually
do exactly what you want to do.
And those localization hints
that you included in your code,
well, they show up as comments that
are read by the localizer.
Let's look at an example here.
So source code, mountains.m,
inside there I'm creating
an NSString object.
I'm using NSLocalizedString from table.
The key I'm going to look for is
something called tallmountain.
The table I'll be looking inside
is called mountains.strings.
And the localization hint is name of
the tallest mountain in the world.
OK, I look in my directory.
There's no .strings file.
I run genstrings over my source code,
and there it is,
mountains.mountain.mountain.
.strings.
It's been created for me.
I open it up with my
favorite text editor,
and what I see is my
localization hint as a comment,
my key,
and then a dummy value for the value.
OK, now this I give to my localizers.
My English localizer,
who probably has the
cubicle next to mine,
hand it to him.
He reads it, opens it.
Name of the tallest
mountain in the world.
Okay, the value for that key
has to be Mount Everest.
sent it off to New Delhi to
my Hindi localizer.
She opens it up in her text editor,
sees name of the tallest
mountain in the world,
and for the value,
she puts in however you
say Mount Everest in Hindi,
which I cannot pronounce.
I'm sorry to say.
I don't need to.
The localization is there for me.
This is how you localize text.
You use .strings files.
Put every string that you're going
to show to the user in one of these,
have a key for it,
and then use the functions that
access the value for the key.
That's strings.
That was the hard bit.
Now we're going to go on to bundles.
Bundles are easy.
Bundles are special folders,
and that's really all they are.
They have a certain
structure that is used.
They have identifiers,
which can be handy.
Most of the time, the user will see them
as a single object.
And in particular,
for internationalization,
inside a bundle, inside the bundles that
we'll be dealing with,
is a subfolder called resources.
And inside those are subfolders
whose names end in L,
language project.
That's where the localizations live.
What are bundles?
Applications are bundles.
They're folders with a certain structure.
Frameworks are bundles.
Both of these can contain localizations.
Another thing which you will
usually see as a bundle is a nib.
Nib files are where
your UI elements live.
And they contain your windows,
they contain your menus,
things like that.
You create them and edit
them with Interface Builder.
Now, in Leopard,
we've introduced a ZIB format,
which is an XML format that can
contain the contents of a nib.
These play nicer with most
source control systems.
But in the past,
these have always been bundles, nib.
So how do we represent them on Mac OS?
Well, we use the NSBundle class.
This is the basic class.
Be aware,
NSBundle is not toll-free bridged
with its core foundation counterpart.
This is the one place where you have
to be aware where you're getting
the bundle from and what functions
you need to use to manipulate it.
Again, here we're focusing on Cocoa,
so we'll be looking at NSBundle.
The same functionality is available
pretty much for CFBundleRef.
You just access it slightly differently.
How do you get them?
There are three main ways you will
probably get a bundle when you need it.
The easiest is to call mainBundle.
Hand this off to the NSBundle class,
and you get back the bundle that
corresponds to the application
which is currently running,
which is probably going to be you.
Now, if you're a framework,
that doesn't do you any good.
If you want to get some data
inside yourself as a framework,
you can't use mainBundle.
That will give you the bundle for
the application that's using you,
not you.
So you call bundleWithIdentifier.
You know what your identifier is.
I hope you know what your identifier is.
And that way, you get inside yourself.
Or, if you're an application and you want
to get inside a frameworks bundle,
which will not happen very often,
but when it does,
you will typically get a bundle.
You will typically know a class
which is defined by that framework,
and you simply call bundleForClass,
given the class.
And you get the correct bundle back.
You're not going to use
bundles a lot directly.
Most of this is taken care
of for you by the system.
If you do need to use bundles,
it will probably be because you need to
get some sort of a resource file of a
type which isn't defined by the system.
It isn't a nib.
It isn't an image.
It isn't a string.
For that kind of data,
you will use the function
path for resource of type.
You hand in the name of the file,
you hand in its extension,
and you get back a path to the properly
localized version of that file.
There are different variants of this,
and you can use the
But this is the one that you
will most often be using.
Okay, that was bundles.
They are also easy.
Let's look at locales.
What is a locale?
Well, a locale is an object that
corresponds to a particular place.
Places can be big.
They can be entire countries: Russia,
China, Canada.
They can be small: Wales, Liechtenstein,
my bedroom.
Most often, they are not just a place,
they are a combination of
a place and a language.
This makes it possible to have one
locale for Welsh-speaking Wales and
another for English-speaking Wales,
or French-speaking Canada and
English-speaking Canada.
defines a default set of
values and way of doing things.
Date and time formats.
What the local currency is.
What units of measurements
are being used.
What calendar is being used.
This is all found inside a locale.
The values that we supply on
Mac OS come from what is called
the Common Locale Data Repository,
which has data on literally
hundreds of locales.
It's a massive open source project
in which Apple participates.
Of course, you don't have to use these.
You can override them yourself
if you want to live dangerously,
or you can let the user override them if
you want to live rather less dangerously.
Okay.
Locales are not user preferences.
They kind of are.
They tell you how the
user wants to do things.
But the main thing you need to be
aware of is a locale is kind of
a preference that is common to an
entire place and which is accessed
through not the preference mechanism
but through the locale mechanism.
Similarly, locales are not localizations.
Now, they contain localized data.
They contain data that
changes from place to place.
But what you need to think of as a
localization is what is unique to your
program that varies from place to place.
Your menus, your windows, your panels,
things like that.
That's where the localization is.
: Locales do contain localized data,
but it's not the same
thing as your localization.
Here's how you set them.
On the Mac, you set locales,
you set place and language separately.
To set the place,
you go to your international
preferences panel.
You go to the
formats tab.
I've set it to the United Kingdom.
I'm formatting dates the British way.
I'm using the British pound sterling.
I'm on the metric system.
I'm using the Gregorian calendar.
All of this is set for me all at once.
If I want to set the language,
I again go to international preferences.
This time I look at the languages pane,
and here I have a list of languages.
It's important to be aware of this.
This is the order in which the user
would like to see localizations.
Now, here they're saying I want to see
the English localization first.
If you have one, show it to me.
That's not going to be a terribly
useful list in this case because
almost everything is going
to be localized to English.
Here's another example.
This is what you might see on a system
of somebody who's native Chinese.
They prefer traditional Chinese,
but they can read simplified Chinese.
They can manage Japanese and
even a little French.
So if you have a traditional
Chinese localization,
that's what they want.
If you don't have one,
then they'd like to
see simplified Chinese.
If you don't have either of those,
they'll live with Japanese.
And if you don't have any of those,
French is OK.
And if you don't have French, OK,
I'll live with English.
And that's how it works.
This is how the system decides
which localization to show the user,
if not all of them are available.
So a localization,
this is an LPROJ folder that
lives inside your application
bundle or your frameworks bundle.
That's where your localization data,
localized data lives,
your localized nibs,
your localized .strings files.
The functions look inside
the various LPROJ folders,
which are available in a certain order.
That order is defined by the user.
And when they find something acceptable,
then that's what they show to the user.
The Lproj folders are named for the
language or the dialect that they cover.
For this, we use a protocol,
best common practices 47,
which is a way of defining in a
standard way locale identifiers
and language identifiers.
Here's an example.
We're looking inside
an application bundle.
Here's our contents.
We have our resources subfolder,
and we have a number of
different localizations here.
We have EN-DSRT,
that's English with a Deseret alphabet,
and then regular English,
and then French and Japanese and
Russian and traditional Chinese.
You'll notice my icon isn't localized,
so it's not inside an Lproj folder,
but everything else is.
Now, I include Deseret alphabet
not just to be cute.
There's a really important point
you need to be aware of here.
You, as an application developer,
and your users,
are not limited to a predefined
set of localizations by Apple.
If for some reason your users do in fact
want a Deseret Alphabet localization,
you can provide it and they can use it,
and nothing has to be done to the system.
Now,
Deseret Alphabet is not terribly likely.
There are some other
languages that are likely.
Thai, for example.
We may not localize everything to Thai,
but a Thai locale can be provided,
a Thai localization.
So you are not limited by us
to a certain set of locales.
Localization tools.
There are a couple of things that
you can do to create localizations.
You can hand edit them.
You can hand edit the nibs and strings
yourself if you really want to.
Big problem here is you may end
up with inconsistent translations.
Two different translators will translate
the same thing two different ways.
There are tools that help
simplify this process.
Apple provides one called Apple Glot.
There's also a third-party tool,
iLocalize.
Both of these use glossaries
provided by Apple,
which is basically a set of
the translations that we use.
And you can take advantage of these
to get consistent translations.
How do we represent locales?
Well, we use the NSLocale class.
This is the core class to
represent a locale object.
It's toll-free bridged, again,
with its core foundation counterpart,
NSLocaleRef.
Which is, again, very handy,
but we'll be focusing on NSLocale.
How do I create one?
Well,
The easiest way is to use current locale.
That gives me the current locale,
kind of.
It gives me whatever locale
was set when I was launched.
Now, you may want to be a little
more responsive than that.
You may want to actually,
if the user changes the
locale while you're running,
you may want to reflect
that back to them.
And so in Leopard,
we've added a new function,
auto-updating current locale.
This gives you the actual, right now,
up-to-the-date current locale.
If you're going to be responding
to when the locale changes,
you need to be able to find
out when the locale changes.
And so we have a new notification
you can take advantage of.
NSCurrentLocale did change notification.
If you react to this,
then you will find out when the
locale has changed and you can
update things appropriately.
And finally,
there's NSLocaleWithIdentifier.
I mentioned there's a standard
way of giving locales identifiers.
This lets you put in an arbitrary locale
and hopefully get something useful back.
You can get a list of the locales
that come with the system,
or you can create your own on
the fly if you really want to.
So here I have an example.
EN, English language, hyphen DSRT,
written with the Deseret alphabet,
underscore US,
reflecting American practices,
at calendar equals Japanese,
using the Japanese calendar instead
of whatever the default was.
I really doubt you will ever in
your life encounter this locale.
for the record I have.
It exists.
You can define it.
Your user can define it.
If this is what they want,
this can be provided to them.
What can you get from a locale?
All kinds of stuff.
What currency is set?
What measurement system is being used?
Where are you?
So here we have an example.
We get our locale,
auto-updating current locale.
Find out the currency,
or in this case the currency code,
NSLocale currency code.
Hand that off to object for key.
We find out what the currency code is.
This is a string.
We want to know if we're using
the metric system or not.
NSLocale uses metric system.
This gives us back an NSNumber,
which we interpret as a Boolean.
Right off we know.
Now, suppose I want to show the user the
name of the country where they are.
Suppose somehow they
have forgotten this fact.
Easy to do.
First, I get the identifier,
the ID for the country,
the standard country code.
I have my locale, say object for key,
NSLocale country code,
and I get back something like US.
Now, this is an ID.
This is not a user-visible string.
NSLocale can hand you the proper
string for the user to see.
Here we use a function,
display name for key.
We have our locale.
It's the current locale.
We say, okay,
I want a country code converted
to a user-visible string.
And the country code in particular is US,
and it hands me back the
string United States.
So this lets you see the
proper localization for a
particular piece of data.
NSL CalObjects do not, however,
let you know
is a localizer.
He knows what the user's list
of preferred languages is.
Fortunately, that is also easy to get.
This is new in Leopard.
You can give the NSLocale class,
not objects, but the class.
hand off the message preferred languages.
This gives you an array back.
The array consists of NSStrings.
These NSStrings are the proper
IDs for the languages in order.
So we have here ZH-HANT,
traditional Chinese, followed by ZH-HANS,
simplified Chinese, Japanese, French,
English, Russian,
and so on down the line.
This has been available for a long time.
In the past, you got that through the
preferences mechanism,
and it was clumsy and difficult,
and now it's much easier in
case you need to have it.
Usually, of course,
what you want to know is what the
user has set to the current language,
so you get this array.
Just look at the first element.
When do you use locales?
Well, more likely than not,
you will never need to use an NSLocale.
Because the resource accessing
functions do the right thing for you.
They are aware of what the current
locale is and they will give you back
the correct localization based on that.
Now, if you allow the user to override
whatever is set in System Preferences,
your calendar application,
and you let the user set the
calendar inside your application,
say, or something like that, okay,
then you can create your
own locale and use it.
You need to explicitly use the locale.
Or if you want to show
data from multiple locales,
multiple localizations, again,
this is a case where you would actually
create and use an NSLocale option.
project.
All right.
That's the basics of how to localize,
how to internationalize on Mac OS.
Let's see some examples that
show how it actually works.
So, first we want to get a localized nib,
and we want to get a localized data file,
and finally we want to get
a localized string nib.
Okay, remember,
nibs are where UI elements live.
This provides you your menus,
things like that.
All right,
I want my properly localized one.
How do I do it?
You probably have to do nothing.
A lot of applications,
if basically all you're dealing
with are nibs for your menus
and maybe your documents,
well,
then everything is taken care of for you.
When you're launched,
the correct localization is found,
the correct nib is dealt
with in the system,
and you just have to find
out when the nib is set up.
You don't have to do any work.
If you, however,
do something like have your own
about box or you have a preferences
pane or something like that,
well, okay, you need a nib for those.
How do I do it?
There's a function on NSBundle,
and it's loadNibNamed.
You hand in the name of
the nib that you want.
You hand in the object
that's going to own it.
You're given back a Boolean
that lets you know whether or
not it was found and loaded.
And that's all the work you have to do.
So finding the correct localization
is handled automatically for you.
Now, what about a data file?
Okay,
I have a data file inside my application.
Oh, and it's localized.
It varies from place to place.
I want to make sure I get the right one.
How do I do that?
Well, again,
you use Path for Resource of Type.
So, here's an example.
I want my bundle.
I'm an application, so I get my bundle.
I'm looking for a file.
The file name is Mountains.
The file type is plist.
Give me a path to it.
Hand that off to the bundle.
And you get the correct path for the
correct localization of that file.
Maybe there is no localization at all.
Maybe it's something
that isn't localized.
That's okay.
If there is a localization,
you're handled that.
If there isn't one,
then you're handled that.
Everything is taken care of for you.
All right.
Now, this is a P-list.
P lists are handy because you
can put Objective C objects
of them of certain types,
strings and numbers and so on.
So here I have an array inside my P list.
This is a file I created,
so I know what it is.
So I just hand it off to NSArray,
array with contents of file,
hand off the path I got,
and the correct localization
for this data file is turned
into an array of objects.
I can now step through the array
and do whatever it is I want to do.
Last example,
we want to get a localized string.
We're going to go through this
a bit more slowly because there
are a couple of gotchas here.
I'm going to show a string to the user.
This string is going to
show them a mountain's name,
how high it is,
and when it was first climbed.
So there are three values
that I'm going to deal with.
I presumably have a mountain
object that contains these.
Now, user visible string,
that means I want it localized.
So I start off by calling
NS localized string.
I'm going to look for
a key sentence format.
I'm going to look inside
mountains.strings to get the string.
And I'm telling the localizer,
by the way, in case you need to know,
this is a sentence.
It has the mountain's name
as the first parameter,
the height as the second parameter,
and the climb date as
the third parameter.
Notice that this is handy
not just for the localizer,
but also for the programmer,
who probably forgot to comment
their code here anyway.
So there's your comment.
Okay.
I have my format.
Now I want my localized name.
Okay.
I want a localized name.
Now, this is assuming I'm using
just one table of mountains,
and so I do need a localized name.
So, again,
I call NSLocalizedString from table.
I hand in the name of the mountain.
I look inside names.strings.
This time, it's not possible to have a
really useful localization hint.
You could put one in.
There's certainly no harm to it.
In this case, we didn't.
And you get back the correctly
localized name for the mountain.
Equally easy.
Here's where the gotchas come in.
You have an NSNumber.
You want to include it in a
formatted string that the user sees.
String with format handles NSNumbers.
You can hand it an NSNumber and
it will format for you.
The temptation is going to be to do that.
Don't do that.
Numbers are formatted in different
ways in different parts of the world.
French and English, yeah,
a Frenchman can live with the way
English format numbers and vice versa.
In fact, string with format doesn't
even put the commas in.
There's no problem there, surely.
Arabic countries do not use the
same set of numerals as the West.
They will want to see the
Arabic numerals used instead of the
Hindu Arabic numerals that we use.
So you want a localized number.
How do I do that?
Well, I need a number formatter.
Create it, initialize it.
I tell it, okay,
this is going to be a decimal number.
That means you use a decimal
point and a thousand separators,
possibly.
And then I just give it the number,
hand that off to string from number,
and I get back a correctly
localized string.
[Transcript missing]
Okay.
Here we go.
Now, let's start off by looking a little
bit at our localization stuff.
So let's go to System Preferences.
International Preferences.
We're set to the United States.
We can live with this for the
moment if we really have to.
Look at the number of regions available.
That's not a terribly long list.
Well, it happens that this is just
a list of the countries that
have English locales defined.
I must admit this is a really weird list.
I would not have expected
Botswana and Belgium to have
English locales defined for them,
but they do.
So that data is there.
If I want to see all the locales,
show all regions.
This shows me all of the
places that we have data for.
This is a much longer list.
is grouped by language,
so it's easy to find
what I'm looking for.
Some places,
Afrikaans is only used in South Africa.
Other places, Arabic is used in lots
of different countries.
So in each of these cases,
you can have lots of different places
that use a particular language.
So there are lots and lots of different
places for which localization,
localized data exists.
All right.
Let's switch back to
languages for the moment.
All right.
Now,
we're going to show off localization.
So showing English first, well,
that's dull.
Let's do French first,
which is far more interesting.
And, okay,
let's leave things there for the moment.
All right, here's our application.
Launch it.
And something has gone wrong.
This isn't
I tell you that because
you may not notice.
What happened?
Well, okay, let's look inside here.
This is a bundle.
It's a folder.
Hold down control.
Okay, show package contents.
Okay, contents, resources.
All right,
localizations that this application has,
desert alphabet, English, Japanese,
Russian, traditional Chinese, no French.
That's why we saw no French.
There is no French localization.
All right,
we'll deal with that problem in a minute.
Now, let's look here.
Actually, we do see some French.
We've gotten as much French as the
system can provide in the absence
of an actual French localization.
The dates are French.
That's been taken care of for me.
Here we have a list of mountains.
This is a fascinating list of mountains.
We have some very tall mountains here.
Mount Everest, K2, Annapurna.
We have some very important
American mountains,
Mount Whitney, Mount Shasta,
for the really patriotic
Mount Washington.
I have a couple of mountains that
I can see from my front porch,
so they're there, too.
That's fine.
We have the date they were first climbed.
I don't know when the Mount Olympus
in Salt Lake was first climbed,
so I leave that blank.
That's all right.
I can sort everything.
This is an NS table view,
so I can do that.
I can do this very easily.
Okay.
Up at the top, I have a sentence about
whatever mountain is selected.
I change the selection.
That updates automatically.
Okay.
Now, I have a date and time picker.
I did this just to be cute.
I'll be honest.
Simply because it's
doing the right thing.
I had to do no work here.
I simply put it in my application,
and it knows that the
user wants to use French,
and so it gives them a French calendar.
[Transcript missing]
My application is aware of
when the locale changes.
Here we go.
Heights are now formatted the
way it's done in Luxembourg.
To be honest,
this is not what I was expecting,
because the French would
have left a space.
People in Luxembourg prefer a period.
I'm using the metric system now,
because I'm in Europe.
The heights have switched to meters.
The system won't change between
metric and English for you.
I'm sorry.
You do have to do that yourself.
But at least you can find out
which you're supposed to use.
Now, finally, down here,
in case you didn't notice,
here I have a list of what locales
are available for this application,
what localizations are available.
English,
this is the English-English flag,
as opposed to the British flag.
Japanese, Russian,
and traditional Chinese.
So here I'm getting data
from different locales.
I'm running through the
list of available locales.
I'm seeing which ones are
defined for this application.
And I'm getting the flag icon from them.
All right.
So everything seems to be working,
just so you notice.
If I change the order of the languages,
it does update here.
So that's all working the way I want.
Let's go back to French first.
All right.
Now,
we're missing the French localization.
Very bad.
If only there were a
French localization available.
Fortunately, somebody, some kind soul,
has left a folder called
fr.lproj on my desktop.
Let us see what happens when
I put it inside my application.
Launch, and we're in French.
Now, localization can be done in an
entirely drop-in way on Mac OS.
To add a localization,
you just add the L project and that's it.
It is a very simple process.
This means that localizations
can be added after the fact.
After you ship, new localizations can be
added to your application.
So, all right,
everything is in French now.
Well,
we've done a couple of other changes,
too.
We've rearranged things.
Our date and time picker is now
on the right instead of the left.
You do see this.
Not so much for French, not so much for
Western European languages,
but definitely for
Middle Eastern languages.
Languages which are written right
to left tend to prefer to have the
UI elements reordered appropriately.
So you should not assume that you
know how these windows are laid out.
The localizer may need to change
it to fit local practices.
And of course, we have now our list of
localizations showing up correctly.
Now notice something else.
Annapurna K2, Mount McKinley,
Mount Everest,
list of mountains has changed.
Now here,
I have a localized set of mountains
and data for the mountains.
So the people in France are evidently
not terribly interested in the mountains
that are visible from my front porch.
They would rather find
out about Le Cervin,
the Matterhorn.
So the French localizer has
changed the list of mountains to
reflect what the user wants to see.
You'll notice that I've done
another bit of cheating here.
Well, not real cheating.
Another little trick.
In the middle of the sentence,
the Servant is not capitalized.
Shouldn't be.
It's in the middle of a sentence.
When it's standing by itself, it is.
So in this case,
I have my NSString that I got back,
but before I hand it
off to the table view,
I capitalized it because
it's standing by itself.
So again,
the system is doing the right thing.
Now, capitalizing French is really
not terribly difficult.
Writing a capitalization routine
that can handle hundreds of different
languages and 77 different scripts,
most of which you've never even heard of,
that's a bit harder.
Fortunately,
InnoString is doing the work for us.
I just say I want the capitalized string,
and I get it back.
All right, that's the demo.
As I say, a version of this is currently
available on the website,
and an updated version
will be available soon.
If we can go back to the slides.
All right.
More information.
The person to contact is Derek Horn,
the application technologies evangelist.
Derek@apple.com.
He will give you the help that
you need or possibly direct you
to the place you need to go.
Documentation,
if you want to find out how
to internationalize on Mac OS,
excellent documentation is
available at the developer website,
developer.apple.com.
Let's be localized about this,
stroke internationalization.
That's how the BBC seems
to say it all the time.
If you want localization tools,
Apple's tools, these are a free download.
This is where you can get
Apple Glot and other tools and
the glossaries that we use.
developer.apple.com/internationalization/
localization/tools.
And if you want to know
more about Unicode,
go to www.unicode.org.
Excellent place to start.
There are some sessions with
content related to this session.
A couple of these have
already been presented,
but you might want to go back and see
what was said there if you didn't attend.
There is designing applications
with interface builder.
Interface builder is your basic
tool for laying out your UI.
That was yesterday at 5:00.
This morning we had font
management and core text.
There is a lot of overlap in terms of
engineering between people who display
text and people who set up interface.
There is a lot of overlap in content.
So this is a session that you might
want to look into if you didn't attend.
Coming up this evening,
we have text input on iPhone.
This evening at 5:00.
And then tomorrow we have
polishing your Cocoa application.
This will be an excellent opportunity
to see how this all fits into
the bigger picture of Cocoa.
A couple of labs.
We have an input method and
internationalization lab
coming up this afternoon right
after this session at 3:30.
iPhone text input lab tomorrow at 2:00.
And finally, Friday afternoon,
you can stick around long enough if
you really want for the core text lab,
2:00, foundations lab A.
And again, there is going to be a
lot of expertise there,
not just on core text but
also on internationalization
if you have any questions.
So in summary.
Unicode is the way to do
internationalized text on the Mac,
and not just on the Mac,
pretty much everywhere.
Do not assume that you're
dealing with Unicode.
Don't assume that you can deal with
text on a character-by-character basis.
Remember, you have to deal with
chunks of characters.
Above all,
use the APIs built into the system.
This means that your
work is taken care of.
Do not try to write your
own international support.
Unless you are expert,
have a lot of time,
something will go wrong along the way.
Okay.
CS101 should have taught you this,
but you know what?
Programmers are lazy and
we sometimes forget it.
Never show hard-coded
strings to the user.
Never, never, never.
Hard-coded strings are useful
in your application as keys,
but never as something
that you show to the user.
Also, this is a gotcha,
never assume anything about the
relative layout of objects in your UI.
They may have to change from
localization to localization.
Don't assume that they're always
going to be laid out in the same way.
Oh, and of course, never show unlocalized
numbers to the user.
This is not a CS101 thing.
This is something that is easy to forget.
Don't do it.
Always use a formatted number.
Use NSNumberFormatter.
Get the correct localization.